the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT opencourseware continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free to make a donation or to view
additional materials from hundreds of
MIT courses visit MIT opencourseware at
ocw.mit.edu
so let me remind you yesterday with
defined and started to compute
line integrals for work
of a vector field
along a curve okay so we have
a curve in the plane
C
we have a vector field F that gives us a
vector
at every point
and we want to find the work done
along the Curve
so
that's the line integral along c of f
dot Dr
or more geometrically line integral
along c of F dot t d s where T is the
unit tangent vector and DS is the Arc
Length element
or in coordinates that's the integral
of MDX
plus n d y
where m and n and are the components
of a vector field
okay
so
Let's do an example that we'll just
summarize what we did yesterday and then
we'll move on to interesting
observations about these things
so here's an example we'll we're going
to look at now
let's say I give you the vector field
y i plus x j
so it's not completely obvious what it
looks like but here's a computer plot of
that Vector field so that tells you a
bit what it does
in all sorts of directions
and let's say we want to find
so work done
by this Vector field if I move along
this closed curve I started the origin
when I moved along the x-axis to 1 then
I move along the unit circle
to the diagonal and when I move back to
the origin
in a straight line
Okay so
C consists of three parts
so that you enclose
a sector of a unit disk
corresponding to
angles between 0 and 45 degrees
so
to compute this line and think oh well
what we have to do is we have to set up
three different integrals and add them
together
Okay so
we need to set up
the integral of y d x plus x d y
for each
of this piece
each of these pieces
so let's do the first one
on the x-axis
well one way to parametrize that is to
just use the X variable
and say that because we are on the
so sorry we're going from
the origin to one zero
well
we know we're on the x-axis so there's
wave out is actually just zero
and if a variable will be x from 0 to 1.
if you prefer you can parametrize things
say x equals t for T from 0 to 1 and y
equals zero well it doesn't change is y
is zero and therefore d y is also zero
so in fact we're integrating
y d x plus x d y
but that becomes
well 0 DX
plus 0 and that's just going to give you
zero okay so that's
the line integral here is very easy to
compute of course you can also do it
geometrically because geometrically
you can see in the picture along the
x-axis the vector field is pointing
vertically right if I'm on the x-axis
my Vector field is actually in the y
direction so it's perpendicular to my
curve so the work done is going to be
zero f dot T will be zero
0.
okay any questions about this first part
of the calculation
no it's okay
okay let's move on to more interesting
part of it
let's do
the second part which is
a portion of a unit circle
Okay so
maybe I should have drawn my picture
and so now we are moving
on
this part
of a curve
that's C2
and of course we have to choose how to
express X and Y in terms of a single
variable
well most likely when you're moving on a
circle you're going to use the angle
along the circle to tell you where you
are okay so we're going to use
the angle Theta
as parameter and we'll say well we're on
the unit circle so X is cosine Theta and
Y is sine Theta
what's the range of theta Theta goes
from
0 to pi over 4.
okay
so
whenever I see DX I will replace it by
well the derivative of cosine is
negative sine so minus sine Theta D
Theta
and d y the derivative of sine is cosine
so it will become cosine Theta D Theta
okay so I'm Computing the integral of Y
DX plus x d y
that means
I'll be actually Computing the integral
of Y is sine Theta
DX that's negative sine Theta
D Theta
plus X is cosine
d y is cosine Theta D Theta
from 0 to pi over 4.
okay so that's integral from 0 to pi
over four
of
cosine Square minus sine Square
and if you know your trig then you
should recognize this as cosine of 2
Theta
okay so that will integrate to one half
of sine 2 Theta from 0 to pi over 2 pi
over 4 sorry
and sine pi over 2 is 1 so you will get
one half
okay any questions about this one
nope
okay then let's do the third one
so
the third guy is when we come back to
the origin along the diagonal
okay so we're going a straight line from
this point where's this point well this
point is
1 over 2 1 over root two and we go back
to the origin
okay so we need to figure out a way to X
Plus X and Y in terms of the same
parameter
so one way which is very natural
would be to just say well let's say we
move from here to here over time
and you know at times you know we're
here at time when we're here we know how
to parametrize this line
so what we could do
is say let's parameterize this line
so we start at one over root two and we
go down by one of the Row 2 in time one
and same with y
that's actually
perfectly fine
but that's unnecessarily complicated
okay why is it complicated because we'll
get you know all of these expressions
would be easier to actually just look at
Motion in this direction and then say
well if we have a certain work if we
move from here to here then the work
done moving from here to here is just
going to be the opposite
okay
so in fact
we can do
slightly better
by just saying well we'll take x equals
t y equals t
t
from 0 to 1 over root 2 and
take
well sorry
sorry that gives that gives us
what I will call minus C3 which means C3
backwards
and then we can say the integral for
work along minus C3 is the opposite of a
work along C3
or you know if you're comfortable with
integration where variables go down
then you could also say that t address
goes from one over square root of 2 down
to zero and you know when you set up
your integral it will go from one over
root two to zero
and of course that will be the negative
of a one from zero to one over root two
so it's the same thing
okay so if we do it with this
parametrization
we'll get that well of course DX is DT
d y is DT so the integral along minus C3
of y d x plus x d y is just the integral
from
0 to 1 over root 2 of T DT plus T DT
sorry I'm
I'm messing up my Blackboard
okay
which is going to be well the integral
of 2T DT
which is t squared between these bounds
which is one half
that's the intake all along minus C3
along the Reversed path
and if I want
if I want to do it along C3 instead
then I just take the negative
okay or if you prefer you could have
done it directly with integral from 1
over root 2 to 0 which gave you
immediately the negative one-half
okay so at the end
we get that the total work
was the sum of three line integrals
I'm not fighting f.dr just to save space
that's zero plus one half minus one half
and that comes out to zero so
a lot of calculations for nothing
okay so that would give you a good
overview of you know various ways to
compute line integrals any questions
about all that
no okay
so next let me tell you about how to
avoid Computing line integrals
well one is easy don't take this class
but that's not
so here's another way not to do it
okay so let's look a little bit about
one kind of vector field that actually
we've encountered a few weeks ago
without saying it
so we say it when we have a function of
two variables we have a gradient vector
well at the time it was just a vector
but that Vector depended on X and Y so
in fact it's a vector field
okay so here's an interesting special
case
say that f
our Vector field is actually the
gradient of some function so it's a
gradient field
and
so f is a function of two variables X
and Y
and that's called the potential
for
the vector field
the reason is of course from physics you
know in physics you call potential well
electrical potential or gravitational
potential
the potential energy
this function of position that stores
that tells you how much
actually energy is stored somehow by the
first field and its gradient gives you
the false actually
not quite if you're a physicist then the
force will be negative gradient
so that means that physicists potentials
are the opposite of mathematics and
potential okay so let's just have to
confuse you
it doesn't really matter but
so to make things simpler we are using
this convention
and you know you just put a minus sign
if you're doing physics
so
then I claim we can simplify
the evaluation
of the line integral for work
okay so perhaps you've seen in physics
the work done by say the electrical
force
is actually given by the change in value
of a potential from the starting point
to the ending point
I'll same for gravitational force
so these are special cases of What's
called the fundamental theorem of
calculus for nine integrals
so the fundamental theorem of calculus
not following integrals tells you if you
integrate a derivative then you get back
the function
and here it's the same thing in
multivariable calculus it tells you if
you take the line integral of a gradient
of a function what you get back is the
function
foreign
Okay so
the fundamental theorem
of calculus for nine integrals
says
following thing it says if you integrate
a vector field that's the gradient of a
function
along a curve
let's say that you have a curve that
goes from some starting point P0
to some ending point P1
then all you will get is the value of F
at P1 minus the value of F at P0
okay so that's a pretty nifty formula
but it only works if the field that
you're integrating is a gradient you
know it's a gradient and you know the
function little f
I mean we can't put just any Vector
field in here we have to put the
gradient of f
so
actually on Tuesday we'll see how to
decide whether a vector field is
gradient or not
and if it is a gradient how to find the
potential function
so we'll cover that
but for now
we're going to try to figure out a bit
you know more about this what it says
what it means physically how to think
about it geometrically and so on
so maybe I should say you know if you
try to fight this in coordinates because
that's also a useful way to think about
it
if I give you the line integral along c
so the gradient field the components are
F sub X and F sub y so it means I'm
actually integrating
F sub X DX plus F sub y d y
or if you prefer
that's the same thing as actually
integrating the F so I'm integrating the
differential of a function f
well then that's
the change in F
and of course if you write it you know
in this form
then probably it's quite obvious to you
that this should be true
I mean in this form actually it's the
same statement as in single variable
calculus
okay
and actually that's how we prove the
theorem so let's prove
this theorem
how do we
prove it well let's say I give you a
curve and I ask you to compute this
integral
how will you do that
well the way you compute the integral
actually is by choosing a parameter and
expressing everything in terms of that
parameter
Okay so
we'll set
well so we know it's F sub X DX
plus F sub y d y
and we'll want to parameterize C
in the form x equals x of t y equals y
of t
so if we do that then DX becomes X Prime
of T DT d y becomes y Prime of T DT
so
we know X is X of T that tells us DX is
X Prime of t
DT
Y is
y of T gives us d y is y Prime of T DT
so now what we are integrating actually
is
becomes the integral of f sub x times DX
DT
plus F sub y times dydt
times DT
okay
but now here I recognize a familiar guy
I've seen this one before in the chain
rule
okay this guy by the chain hole is the
rate of change of f if I take X and Y to
be functions of T and I plug those into
f
so in fact
what I'm integrating is DF DT
when I think of f as a function of T by
just
you know plugging X and Y as functions
of t
DT
and so maybe actually I should now say
you know I have sometimes
T goes from some initial time let's say
t0 to T1
and now by the usual fundamental theorem
of calculus I know that this will be
just the change in the value of f
between t 0 and T1
okay
so
integral from t0 to T1 of dfdt
DT well that becomes f
between t0 and T1
F of what we just have to be a little
bit careful here
well it's not quite F of T it's F seen
as a function of T by putting X of T and
Y of T into it so let me divide that
down carefully
what I'm integrating to IS F
of X of T and Y of t
right does that sound fair yeah
okay and so when I plug in T1 I get the
point where I am at time T 1 that's the
end point of my curve
when I plug t 0 I will get the starting
point of my curve P0
and that's the end of a proof
it wasn't that hard see
okay
so let's see an example
well
let's look at that example again
okay so we have this curve
we had this Vector field could it be
that by accident that Vector field was a
gradient field
so remember our Vector field was
y comma X
can we think of a function whose
derivative respect to X is y and
derivative with respect to Y is X
yeah x times y sounds like
a good candidate
well
f of x y is X Y
okay
so that means that the line integrals
that we computed along these things can
be just evaluated
from just finding out the values of F at
the end point
so here's version 2 of my plot
where I've added the Contour plot of a
function X Y on top of the vector field
actually see how you know the vector
field is still pointing perpendicular to
the level curves as we have seen just to
you know remind you
and so now when we move
wealthy origin is on the level curve f
equals zero and when we start going
along C1 we stay on f equals zero so
there's no work the potential doesn't
change
then on C2 the potential increases from
zero to one half the work is one-half
and then on C3 we go back down from one
half to zero the work is negative
one-half
see that was much easier when computing
so for example the integral
along C2
is actually just
so C2
goes from
one zero to
one over root two one over root two
so that's one half minus zero and that's
one half
okay because C2
was going
here
and at this point
f is 0 at that point f is one half
and similarly for the others and of
course when you sum you get zero because
the total change in F when you know you
go from here to here to here to here
eventually you're back at the same place
so F hasn't changed
okay so that's a neat trick and it's
important conceptually because a lot of
forces are gradients of potentials I
mean namely gravitational force electric
force
the problem is not every Vector field is
a gradient a lot of vector fields are
not gradients for example magnetic
fields certainly are not gradients
so
a big warning
everything
today
only applies
if f
is a gradient field
okay it's not true of our wise
okay still let's see what are the
consequences
of a fundamental theorem
so
just to put one more time this
disclaimer if f is a gradient field
then
what do we have
well
there's various nice features of work
done by gradient fields that are not
true for over Vector Fields so one of
them is this property of path
Independence
okay so the claim is if I have a line
integral to compute
then it doesn't matter which path I take
as long as it goes from point A to point
B it just depends on the point where I
start the point where I end
and that certainly false in general
but for a gradient field it works okay
so if I have
a point P0 a point P1 and I have two
different paths that go there say C1
and C2
so they go from the same point to the
same point but
in different ways
then
in this situation the line integral
along C1
is equal to the line integral along C2
well actually let me insist
but this is only for gradient Fields by
putting gradient F in here
just so you know you don't get tempted
to ever use this for a field that's not
a gradient field
if C1 and C2 have the same
start and end point
okay how do we prove that well it's very
easy we just use the fundamental theorem
it tells us if you compute the line
integral along C1 it's just F at this
point minus F at this point if you do it
for C2 well same
and for that you don't actually even
need to know what little f is you know
in advance but it's going to be the same
so if I give you a vector field and I
tell you it's the gradient of a
mysterious function but I don't tell you
what the function is and you don't want
to find out you can still use path
Independence but only if you know what
it's a gradient
oh
okay
okay I guess this one is dead so
that will stay here forever because
nobody's tall enough to erase it now
when you come back next year and you
still see that formula you'll see
okay
yes but there's no useful information
here I mean
that's a good point
okay
so
what's another consequence
one I mean so
if you have a gradient field
it's
what's called conservative
okay so what's a conservative field
well the word conservative comes from
the idea in you know in physics it's
been often of conservation of energy
it tells you that you cannot get energy
for free out of your first field
so what it means is in particular
you know if you take
a closed trajectory so a trajectory that
goes from some point back to the same
point
so if C is a closed curve
then
the work done along c
is zero
okay that's the definition of what it
means to be conservative
if I take any closed curve the work will
always be zero
conference not conservative means
somewhere there is a curve along which
for work is not zero
if you find a curve where the work is
zero that's not enough to say it's
conservative you have to show that no
matter what curve I give you if it you
know if it's a closed curve it will
always be zero
so
what that means concretely is you know
if you have a force field that's
Conservative then you cannot build
somehow some you know Capitol motion out
of it you can't build something that
will just keep going just powered by
that Force because that force is
actually not providing any energy after
you've gone you know one loop around
nothing's happened from the point of
view of the energy provided by that
Force there's no work coming from the
force
while if you have a first field that's
not Conservative then you can try to
actually maybe find a loop where the
work will be positive and then you know
that thing will just keep running
so actually if you look at magnetic
fields and Transformers or
no power adapters and things like that
you precisely you extract energy from a
magnetic field of course I mean you
actually have to take some power supply
to maintain the magnetic field but
so a magnetic field you could actually
try to get energy from it almost for
free gravitational fields or an electric
Fields you can't
okay so
and now why why does that hold well if I
have a gradient field
then if I try to compute this line
integral I know that it will be the
value of a function at the end point
minus the value at the starting point
but they are the same so you know the
value is the same
so if I have a gradient field
and I do the line integral then I will
get F at the end point minus F at the
starting point
but we have the same point so that
okay
so just to reinforce my warning that not
every field is a gradient field
let's look again at
you know
our favorite Vector field from yesterday
so our favorite Vector field yesterday
was negative Y and X
it's a vector field that just rotates
around the origin
counterclockwise
well
we said
if you take say say you take just the
unit circle
for example counterclockwise well
remember we said yesterday that the line
integral
of f d r
maybe I should say F dot TDS now
so because the vector field is tangent
to the circle
so on the unit circle
f
is tangent
to the curve and so F that t
is length F times where length T but T
is a unit vector
so it's length F and the length of f on
the unit circle was just one
so that's the integral of one DS so
that's just the length of a circle
that's 2 pi
and 2 pi is definitely not 0.
so this Vector field is not conservative
and so now we know actually it's not the
gradient of anything
because if it was if it were gradient
then it would be conservative and it's
not
so
tells you you know it's an example of a
vector field that is not conservative
it's not path independent either by the
way because
see if I go from here to here
along the upper half circle or under the
lower along the lower half circle in one
case I will get Pi in the other case I
will get negative pi I don't get the
same answer
and so on and so on
it just you know fails to have all of
these properties
so maybe I will write that down
it's not conservative
not path independent
it's not a gradient
it doesn't have any of its properties
okay any questions
ah how do you determine whether
something is a gradient or not well
that's what we will see on Tuesday
yes
is it possible that it's conservative
and not path independent or vice versa
the answer is no these two properties
are equivalent and we're going to see
that right now
at least that's the plan
okay
yes
uh let's see so you said if it's not
path independent then we cannot draw
level curves with our perpendicular to
it at every point
I wouldn't necessarily go that far you
might be able to draw curves that are
perpendicular to it but they won't be
the level curves of a function for which
this is the gradient
I mean you might still have you know if
you take say take this gradient field
and you know scale it but in strange
ways you know multiply it by two in some
places by one in other places by five in
some other places you will get something
that won't be conservative anymore and
it will still be perpendicular to the
curves
so it's more subtle than that but
but certainly if it's not conservative
and it's not a gradient and you cannot
do what we said
and how to decide whether it is or not
that will be Tuesday's topic
so for now I just want to
figure out again actually
let's now State all these properties
oh
actually let me first do one minute of
physics
so
let me just tell you again you know
what's the physics in here
so if a force field
is the gradient
of a potential
so I'll still keep my plus sign so maybe
I should say this is minus physics but
uh
so
the work of f
is the change
in value of potential
from one end point to the other endpoint
and
foreign
so you know you might know about
gravity oops
gravitate
Channel
field
or electrical
that's us gravitational
potential
and in case you haven't done you know
any 802 Yet electrical potential is also
commonly known as voltage okay it's the
one that makes it hurt when you stick
your fingers into the socket
don't try
okay and
so now conservativeness
means
no energy
can be
expected for free
from the field
you can't just have you know a particle
moving in that field and going on
indefinitely
faster and faster or you know if else
actually friction then you know keep
moving
so
total energy
is conserved
and I guess that's why we call that
conservative
Okay so
let's end with a recap of
various equivalent properties
okay so the first property that I will
have for a vector field is that it's
conservative
so to say that a vector field is
conservative means
that the line integral is zero along any
closed curve
V2 clarify sorry
along all closed curves
okay every closed curve that you you
know give me any closed curve I get zero
so now I claim this is the same thing as
a second property
which is that the line integral
of f is path Independence
okay so that means if I have two paths
with the same endpoints then I will get
always the same answer
why is that equivalent
well let's say that I'm path independent
if I'm path independent
then if I take a closed curve well it
has the same endpoints as just the curve
that doesn't move at all so path
Independence tells me instead of going
all around I could just stay where I am
and when the work would be just zero
so if I'm path independent then I'm
conservative
conversely let's say that I'm just
conservative and I want to check path
Independence
well so I have two points and I have
two paths between them
I want to show that the work is the same
well how do I do that
C1 and C2
well I observe that if I do C1 minus C2
I get a closed path
right if I go first from here to here
and then back along that one I get a
closed path so if I'm conservative I
should get 0.
but if I get 0 on C1 minus C2 it means
that we work on C1 and we work on C2
other thing
see so it's the same
it's just a different way to think about
the situation
more things that are equivalent
two more things to say
the third one it's equivalent to F being
a gradient field
okay so this is equivalent
to the third property
f
is a gradient field
why well if we know that it's a gradient
field then we've seen that we get these
properties out of a fundamental theorem
question is if I have a conservative or
path independent Vector field why is it
the gradient of something
Okay so
this way
is a fundamental theorem
that way
well
so that actually let me just say
that will be
how we find the potential
so how do we find potential well let's
say that I know the value of my
potential here actually I get to choose
what it is remember in physics the
potential is defined up to adding or
subtracting a constant what matters is
only the change in potential
so let's say I know my potential here
and I want to know my potential here
what do I do well I take my favorite
particle and I move it from here to here
and I look at the work done and that
tells me how much the potential has
changed
so that tells me what the potential
should be here
and this does not depend on my source of
path because I've assumed that I'm path
independent
so that's what we will do
on Tuesday
and let me just State the fourth
property
that's the same
so all that stuff is the same as also
for
if I look at
MDX Plus ndy
is what's called an exact differential
so what that means an exact differential
means it can be put into a form
DF for some function f and you know I'm
just
reformulating this thing right because
I'm saying just I can put it in the form
F sub X DX plus F sub y d y which means
my Vector field was a gradient field so
these things are really the same
okay so after the weekend on Tuesday
we'll actually figure out how to decide
whether these things hold or not and how
to find the button